---
title: 'Boeing 747' date: 'May 5, 2021' cover_image: '/images/posts/img6.jpg' excerpt: 'In this article we will look at
some of the new features offered in the interior of the Boeing 747' category: 'Boeing' author: 'Jane Doe'
author_image: 'https://randomuser.me/api/portraits/women/11.jpg'
---

## Background

In 1963, the United States Air Force started a series of study projects on a very large strategic transport aircraft.
Although the C-141 Starlifter was being introduced, officials believed that a much larger and more capable aircraft was
needed, especially to carry cargo that would not fit in any existing aircraft. These studies led to initial requirements
for the CX-Heavy Logistics System (CX-HLS) in March 1964 for an aircraft with a load capacity of 180,000 pounds (81.6 t)
and a speed of Mach 0.75 (430 kn; 800 km/h), and an unrefueled range of 5,000 nautical miles (9,300 km) with a payload
of 115,000 pounds (52.2 t). The payload bay had to be 17 feet (5.18 m) wide by 13.5 feet (4.11 m) high and 100 feet (30
m) long with access through doors at the front and rear.[6]

The desire to keep the number of engines to four required new engine designs with greatly increased power and better
fuel economy. In May 1964, airframe proposals arrived from Boeing, Douglas, General Dynamics, Lockheed, and Martin
Marietta; engine proposals were submitted by General Electric, Curtiss-Wright, and Pratt & Whitney. Boeing, Douglas, and
Lockheed were given additional study contracts for the airframe, along with General Electric and Pratt & Whitney for the
engines.[6]

The airframe proposals shared several features. As the CX-HLS needed to be able to be loaded from the front, a door had
to be included where the cockpit usually was. All of the companies solved this problem by moving the cockpit above the
cargo area; Douglas had a small "pod" just forward and above the wing, Lockheed used a long "spine" running the length
of the aircraft with the wing spar passing through it, while Boeing blended the two, with a longer pod that ran from
just behind the nose to just behind the wing.[7][8] In 1965, Lockheed's aircraft design and General Electric's engine
design were selected for the new C-5 Galaxy transport, which was the largest military aircraft in the world at the
time.[6] Boeing carried the nose door and raised cockpit concepts over to the design of the 747.[9]

## Design effort WIKI

Ultimately, the high-winged CX-HLS Boeing design was not used for the 747, although technologies developed for their bid
had an influence.[21] The original design included a full-length double-deck fuselage with eight-across seating and two
aisles on the lower deck and seven-across seating and two aisles on the upper deck.[22][23] However, concern over
evacuation routes and limited cargo-carrying capability caused this idea to be scrapped in early 1966 in favor of a
wider single deck design.[1] The cockpit was, therefore, placed on a shortened upper deck so that a freight-loading door
could be included in the nose cone; this design feature produced the 747's distinctive "hump".[24] In early models, what
to do with the small space in the pod behind the cockpit was not clear, and this was initially specified as a "lounge"
area with no permanent seating.[25] (A different configuration that had been considered to keep the flight deck out of
the way for freight loading had the pilots below the passengers, and was dubbed the "anteater".)[26]

The Pratt & Whitney JT9D turbofan suspended under the wing pylon of the 747 prototype. It is stripped of its outer
casing, revealing the engine's core at The Museum of Flight in Seattle, WA The Pratt & Whitney JT9D high-bypass turbofan
engine was developed for the 747. One of the principal technologies that enabled an aircraft as large as the 747 to be
drawn up was the high-bypass turbofan engine.[27] This engine technology was thought to be capable of delivering double
the power of the earlier turbojets while consuming one-third less fuel. General Electric had pioneered the concept but
was committed to developing the engine for the C-5 Galaxy and did not enter the commercial market until later.[28][29]
Pratt & Whitney was also working on the same principle and, by late 1966, Boeing, Pan Am and Pratt & Whitney agreed to
develop a new engine, designated the JT9D to power the 747.[29]

The project was designed with a new methodology called fault tree analysis, which allowed the effects of a failure of a
single part to be studied to determine its impact on other systems.[1] To address concerns about safety and flyability,
the 747's design included structural redundancy, redundant hydraulic systems, quadruple main landing gear and dual
control surfaces.[30] Additionally, some of the most advanced high-lift devices used in the industry were included in
the new design, to allow it to operate from existing airports. These included Krueger flaps running almost the entire
length of the wing's leading edge, as well as complex three-part slotted flaps along the trailing edge of the
wing.[31][32] The wing's complex three-part flaps increase wing area by 21% and lift by 90% when fully deployed compared
to their non-deployed configuration.[33]

Boeing agreed to deliver the first 747 to Pan Am by the end of 1969. The delivery date left 28 months to design the
aircraft, which was two-thirds of the normal time.[34] The schedule was so fast-paced that the people who worked on it
were given the nickname "The Incredibles".[35] Developing the aircraft was such a technical and financial challenge that
management was said to have "bet the company" when it started the project.[1]